### I. INTRODUCTION
Fringing field capacitive based sensors have a wide range of applications, including soil content determination, material conductivity, and temperature reading. [1]. Another application of this technology is in the measurement of the moisture content of a material. This work focuses specifically on the moisture content of a hay bale. As such, a capacitive based moisture content sensor has been developed in order to detect the conditions leading to the spontaneous combustion of hay bales. The combustion is a result of an exothermic process known as respiration or sweating, in which the metabolization of plant sugars by living cells and bacteria residing in the hay produces heat. [2]. The moisture content sensor and a discrete temperature sensor are integrated onto a PCB that is inserted directly into the hay bale and alerts farmers with a wireless notification. The data provided by these two parameters are used to determine which hay bales are at risk of spontaneous combustion.

A device that is capable of alerting farmers of the risk of spontaneous combustion is of great importance, for it can potentially prevent the loss of tens, if not hundreds, of thousands of dollars in farming equipment and property, but most importantly life as well. Since the testing suite is intended for safety and protection of expensive assets, the system needs to be both cost-effective and reliable. For this reason, a fringing field capacitor was selected as the primary sensing component for the moisture content. For the temperature measurement, a thermistor was chosen. In both the case of the thermistor and the capacitive sensor, each circuit was connected to a relaxation oscillator circuit that would allow the values of moisture content and temperature to be determined based off the frequency of each circuit. The adjustability of the capacitor made it a candidate as a sensor, since the signal of the device can be altered by changing the spacing of the electrodes of the capacitor, the area of the electrodes, as well as the distance between them [4]. To properly obtain a reliable reading, the penetration depth of the device had to be sufficient, so as to not detect the moisture situated in the near field of the device. Modeling allowed for a design that would produce the deepest penetration and greatest sensitivity.

### II. BACKGROUND
A. The Respiration Process and Bacteria Hay consists of plant material that has been cut, dried and stored for various applications, such as livestock fodder, erosion control, and archery backstops. Should the hay bale not have sufficient time to cure prior to bailing, a process that allows the hay to dry out over a period of time before being stored, there is the possibility that the bale will spontaneously combust [2].

The driving factor behind the initial heating of hay bales is the respiration of the plant cells within the hay itself, but also mesophilic bacteria, which may also be present in the hay. The respiration process itself is an exothermic reaction, providing large amounts of heat into the surrounding environment, that results from the breaking down of plant sugars. These bacteria thrive in warm, moist environments, such as a hay bale. In the case of the hay bale, it is possible for the temperature to rise up to 140◦F due to the excess heat provided by both the plant cells and the bacteria. Fortunately, this temperature is sufficient to kill off the mesophilic bacteria after several cycles of heating and cooling, eventually stabilizing the hay bale to the temperature of the surrounding environment.

The threat of spontaneous combustion does not arise directly from the presence of the mesophilic bacteria, but rather it is more directly the result of the presence of thermophilic bacteria, which occassionaly are located with the mesophilic bacteria inside of the hay. In most circumstances, if the hay is given a suitable amount of time to dry out, the environment is not conducive for the proliferation of the bacteria. However, if the hay is not cured properly to levels below 20% of overall moisture content, then these bacteria can easily thrive and reproduce [2]. Unlike the mesophilic bacteria, the thermophilic bacteria are capable of surviving at higher temperatures. These bacteria also respirate much like the mesophilic bacteria. The combination of the respirations of the plant cells and both types of bacteria can push the internal temperature past the typical 140◦F expected with the mesophilic bacteria, towards temperatures that can exceed 180◦F. This problem is further exacerbated by the fact that the thermophilic bacteria have the capacity to modify the structure of the hay itself so that it more easily oxidizes with any oxygen that may be present. The combination of high temperature and the oxidation of the hay is what ultimately leads to the spontaneous combustion of the hay bale.

B. Capacitive Fringing Field Sensors
PCBs can offer an inexpensive alternative to standard sensor technology. Typically, a PCB will be formed from some dielectric material. In most instances the material chosen is FR-4, a dielectric consisting of layers of an interwoven fiberglass cloth held together with epoxy [3]. These boards can be manufactured to become very durable and rigid, allowing for an extensive range of application for the boards and any sensor that may be a part of the boards. Exposed copper traces on the surface of the PCB can be used to realize fringing field capacitive sensors.

Typically the capacitance for a parallel plate capacitor can be given by the formula in (1):

C= e0erA/d (1)

Here, 0 is the permitivity of free space,ris the relative permeability of the material located between the plates,Ais the area of the capacitive plates, anddis the distance that separates the two plates. This formula assumes an ideal field in which none of the field lines between the plates fringe outside, but instead are completely contained within the volume of the gap. This approximation is typically applicable in instances where the distance between the two plates is much smaller in magnitude than the area of the plates. In most instances, a fringing field exists around the plates, which has the ability to increase the capacitance. This increase in capacitance is typically denoted as a gamma factor that is directly multiplied with the formula typically given for the capacitance. This value is also not readily calculated, but rather is the result of experimentation. The formula for capacitance including the fringing field is expressed in (2):

C= gamma*e0*er*A/d (2)

Here, γ is the scale factor that accounts for the increase in capacitance. This value is always equal to or greater than one. Should the geometry of the capacitor exist in which the distance between the two plates is not significantly smaller than the magnitude of the area of the plates, then large fringing effects can arise. This is typically the case for an interdigitated capacitor, as the distance between the plates becomes substantially larger as the two plates are put onto the board in parallel.

### III. DESIGN
A. Design Approach
The overall design of the device was directed towards reliability, practicality, and affordability. Every aspect of the sensor suite was focused on these three factors. As expected, when located inside of a hay bale, the sensor and any hardware associated with it will experience a wide range of operating conditions. It was necessary that each component of the suite be capable of withstanding these high temperatures, typically past 160◦F. It was not expected of the hardware to have the capacity of withstanding temperatures in excess of 180◦F, because this is where the hay bale has already reached its critical state. Temperatures in this range have most likely resulted in spontaneous combustion.

In addition, high pressures also exist at the center of the hay bales in which the sensors are placed. To protect the hardware, a rigid and cost effective housing was selected. Additionally, this housing was expected to prevent any moisture from enter- ing and affecting any of the hardware. The primary sensors are the only hardware that are situated outside of the housing, as they are expected to come into contact with moisture directly. Figure 1 displays the entire sensor suite.

Reliability was the most concerning aspect of the power supply. For this application, it is not practical to run cabling to the sensors from an external source. Instead, the best solution is to supply the power locally using batteries. The batteries need to supply power to the sensor throughout the curing process so that farmers do not need to worry about changing the batteries.

B. Moisture Content Detection
Perhaps the most critical aspect of the device was the ability to detect moisture content accurately and reliably. To do so, an interdigitated fringing field capacitor was integrated onto a PCB. The low-cost and durability of the PCB as well as the relative ease of integrating a sensor made the selection a suitable choice. The distance between each of the electrodes of the sensor are on the order of the magnitude, if not greater, than the square root of the area of the capacitor pair. This results in a large fringing field and greater capacitance than would be expected for a parallel plate capacitor with an equivalent area. The increase in capacitance is due to the plates of the capacitor being laid side by side, resulting in a field that has an arching pattern across the medium above the sensor rather than a linear distance between the two plates. This fringing field also permits the fields to penetrate more easily into any material the sensor may be situated within.

For the sensor, several designs were simulated and each one was fabricated to test for highest sensitivity. It was decided to have the sensor detect only in the normal direction. To prevent detection on both sides, a copper backplate was placed underneath the interdigitated sensor. To achieve the highest sensitivity, the electrodes of the sensor were spaced farther apart, as well as having their respective areas reduced. This resulted in an increase in the ratio of the area of the plates with the distance and an overall increase in sensitivity.

The penetration depth of the sensor is primarily a result of the spacing between the electrodes of the sensor [4]. The copper back plate had the added benefit of providing additional sensitivity and penetration depth. This arises from the fact that the backplate pushes the field lines above the sensor farther into the medium, where as a sensor without a backplate will instead pull the field lines away from the medium [5]. Due to this, the groundplate was placed as reasonably close to the sensing side as possible, but not so close in that it would cause the structural integrity of the board to be compromised. This has yet another added benefit of increasing the penetration depth because the sensitivity increases as the penetration depth increases. [6].

To obtain a reading for the moisture content, as well as from the thermistor, a relaxation oscillator was designed. The output frequency of the oscillator is inversely proportional to the capacitance or thermistor values, respectively. For each of the sensors, and individual circuit was designed apart from the other sensor. Figure 2 displays the interdigitated sensor and thermistor integrated onto the PCB.

C. Temperature Determination
Situated next to the interdigitated capacitive sensor was a thermistor. This device has a nearly linear relationship between the temperature and the resistance over the expected temperature range. It was vital that the thermistor did not come into contact with any moisture, as any moisture itself could short the thermistor. To combat this issue, the thermistor, as well as the gap resulting from fabrication connecting the sensor to the hardware, was covered with epoxy. This epoxy would have no measurable effects on the thermistor or its ability to properly determine temperature.

D. Power Supply
The batteries chosen would be required to operate at temperatures in excess of 140◦F. To provide adequate power, three C batteries in series were used to power the device for the entirety of the curing process. The primary purpose of having such a large battery pack is due to the fact that the battery capacity degrades under high temperatures. Over time these high temperatures prevent the batteries from supplying the same power at a given voltage. It is vital that the battery pack be capable of sustaining constant power for the weeks that it may take for the hay to fully cure.

E. Communication and Controller
Communication with the device could be achieved through multiple sources: a text message sent directly from the device, the design of an antenna to send out a signal, and other means of communication. For this application, a device known as the Particle Photon was chosen. This device is a Wi-Fi enabled microcontroller. The choice of the Particle Photon provided a means of communication with the farmer as well as providing a microcontroller for detecting the frequency of the relaxation oscillators.

The three values most critical to the suite were moisture content, temperature, and voltage. The microcontroller has the capacity to monitor the voltage easily in addition to determining the frequency of the relaxation oscillators for both the capacitive sensor and the thermistor. This information is then communicated over a Wi-Fi channel. Initially the device will collect data from the sensors and the batteries at a set period of time. The device then searches for any active Wi- Fi networks to connect to. If it cannot locate any networks, the device will enter into a sleep mode until time for the next reading to be taken, in which it once again searches for a network. Once a network is found, this information is sent out to the Particle Cloud. At the moment it is required that the farmer have a hosted Wi-Fi on a nearby device, such as a smartphone. The hosted Wi-Fi will act as a hotspot for the Photon to connect to and relay the information to the network, which can then be accessed through an internet connection.

F. Suite Housing
An adequate housing for the device was chosen for its ability to protect the suite from any environmental effects, such as moisture. This had the added benefit of being able to protect against large pressures that may be exerted on the sensor due to its location within the center of a large hay bale. Several options were considered, but PVC piping was chosen. PVC provides all of the necessary attributes for protecting the sensor and is a low-cost approach that is easy to manipulate and work with to better adhere to the design goals of the device. To protect the suite PVC pipe SCH 80 was chosen.

The tubing is capable of providing the environmental protection against moisture by having two endcaps placed onto the tubing, but would not protect the device from the heating of the hay bale. Figure 3 depicts an image of the PCB and the interfacing electronics attached to an endcap. The temperature within the housing would eventually reach that of the surrounding hay over time. Additionally, the choice of SCH 80 over SCH 40 provided better protection against UV radiation than SCH 40. Although the protection against UV light was not a primary concern, it does help prevent degradation of the housing by sunlight should the device become dislodged from the hay bale at any time. Another benefit of the choice of PVC pipe is that it allows for the quick and non-damaging removal of the device should an issue arise with the device itself. This can simply be performed by unscrewing an endcap and pulling the hardware out from within the tube. It also facilitates easily changing the batteries between uses.

### IV. CHARACTERIZATION
A. Interdigitated Capacitor
The capacitive sensor and thermistor were the first two devices that had to be proven to be consistent and reliable under varying conditions. The capacitive sensor was characterized by covering the interdigitated cap with samples of hay and straw. Both ground up and whole pieces of hay and straw with varying levels of moisture were used. The moisture contents of the samples were known prior to characterization and stored in separately sealed bins. Moisture contents ranged from 20% to over 80% for both the ground up samples and the straw samples. The testing revealed that as the moisture content in the bins increased, the capacitance of the device would increase at a linear rate. Due to the sensitivity of the original sensor design, a less sensitive design had to be chosen for the testing, as the original design was capable of detecting environmental effects outside of the imperfectly sealed bins, resulting in incorrect readings of the capacitance. This new design was capable of still providing reliable and accurate results for the testing, although the accuracy of the readings compared to the readings of the original design did decrease, as expected. The difference in these readings of the accuracy were negligible for the overall moisture content determination.

B. Thermistor
The thermistor was characterized by varying the temperature in a controlled heating chamber. The thermistor was placed into this chamber in which the temperature was ramped down to as low as 0◦F and then as high as 170◦F several times. This testing allowed for the verification of the performance of the thermistor as temperature varied. At freezing and near freezing temperatures, it was found that the device began to provide erroneous results. It is believed that this is a result of the small amount of moisture in the air in the chamber freezing onto the board, thus shorting out the circuit. This effect is of no particular concern since it is well below any potentially dangerous temperatures. This aspect of the testing did reveal that some parts of the sensor, aside from the capacitive sensor, would also have to be covered in epoxy. At higher temperatures, the thermistor was capable of providing the desired linear results without any issues arising as a result of the heating.

C. Insitu Placement of the Sensor Suite
The assembled sensor suite was placed inside of a hay bale to gather real time data for several months. This pro- vided insight into the lifetime of the battery pack installed and ensured that varying temperatures would not have any negative ramifications upon the device. Initially, the device was regularly monitored during the week, but the monitoring has now become a weekly check. The device was placed into the hay bale by boring a hole out of the center of the hay bale. The device was then placed within this hole, filling the excess airspace with the bored out hay.

### V. CONCLUSION
This design features an interdigitated fringing field capacitive sensor that is used to detect the moisture content of the hay bale. This capacitance is determined using a relaxation oscillator where the frequency of oscillation is inversely proportional to the capacitance value. Similarly, the device measures the temperature of the hay bale using a relaxation oscillator and a thermistor.

The sensor has the ability to send a wireless notification if the hay bale has reached a dangerous moisture content and/or temperature level. The proposed device offers a cost-effective solution to remotely monitor some of the more expensive assets on a farm. The proposed solution addresses an area of safety to avoid the potentially hazardous event of a spontaneous combustion of a hay bale. All of these factors indicate that this design should benefit farmers and ranchers when it is adopted.
